
# Dynamic polaron formation in the thermoelectric tin selenide {#sec:snse}

Ultrafast electron scattering is an ideal tool in the study of materials and systems in which charge carrier-lattice interations are complex. Examples of such systems are charge-density wave materials like 1T-TaSe$_2$[@Shi2019;@Ji2020] and 1T-TiSe$_2$[@Kogar2017;@Otto2021], where the electron density can morph into a periodic structure which might or might not be commensurate with the lattice periodicity. Thermoelectric materials are another class of systems where the charge carriers and the lattice are out-of-sync in some ways[@Mahan1996]. In such materials, a thermal gradient also generates an electrical current due to discrepancy between the electrical and thermal conductivities. 

Thermoelectric materials are of broad interest because can be used to harvest waste heat and transform this energy into useable electrical power [@Snyder2008;@Sootsman2009;@Zebarjadi2012]. The Perseverance rover, which has just landed at this time of writing, uses thermoelectrics as the main power source by converting the heat generated by the natural radioactive decay of plutonium dioxide [@Perseverance2021]. The combination of thermal and electrical properties that make a good thermoelectric material is not found in nature; efficient thermoelectrics must be engineered. It will be described later that the relevant parameters that can be controlled by materials scientist are all interdependent, which makes the optimization of thermoelectrics an arduous task.

Ultrafast methodologies in general have the ability to disentangle couplings between excitations by distinguishing relaxation time-scales. What may appear intrinsic at equilibrium might be revealed as a complex interplay in ultrafast measurements. And yet, ultrafast methodologies have rarely been applied to thermoelectric materials. This presents an opportunity to revolutionize the understanding of thermoelectrics which has only seen incremental progress in the past fifteen years.

In this chapter, the author seeks to understand one of the most performant thermoelectric materials, SnSe, and how to improve its thermoelectric efficiency at room temperature. The fundamental determinants of thermoelectricity are first discussed, followed by a description of the electronic and lattice properties of SnSe. After, the experimental ultrafast electron diffraction and diffuse scattering results are presented. Finally, the experimental results are modelled as bimodal polaron formation, which help to explain the special properties of SnSe as a thermoelectric material. 

## The determinants of thermoelectric performance

The performance of a thermoelectric material is measured via the figure-of-merit $ZT$:
$$
    ZT = S^2 \frac{\sigma}{\kappa_e + \kappa_l}T
    \label{eq:snse-zt}
$$
where $S$ is the Seebeck coefficient, $\sigma$ is the electrical conductivity, $\kappa_e$ and $\kappa_l$ are the thermal conductivities for the charge carriers and the lattice respectively, and $\vect{T}$ is the absolute temperature[@Telkes1947]. $ZT$ is an important figure of merit because it is used to describe the efficiency of a thermoelectric module. Consider a device with a cold side at temperature $T_C$, and a hot side at temperature $T_H$. The heat harvesting efficiency is given by:
$$
\eta = \frac{T_H - T_C}{T_H} \left( \frac{\sqrt{1 + ZT_{avg}} - 1}{\sqrt{1 + ZT_{avg}} + \frac{T_C}{T_H}} \right)
$$
where $T_{avg} = \sfrac{(T_C + T_H)}{2}$ is the average device temperature, and $\sfrac{(T_H - T_C)}{T_H}$ is understood to be the Carnot efficiency[@Sootsman2009;@Zhang2014]. The value of $\eta$ for an abstract device with a given $ZT$ is shown in @fig:snse-efficiency, which illustrates that good efficiency ($>$20%) at reasonable temperatures ($<$\SI{600}{\kelvin}) requires a high $ZT$ ($>$4).

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-efficiency file="figures/snse/efficiency.py" caption="Efficiency of an abstract thermoelectric device harvesting energy from an interface at temperature $T_H$ and attached to a cold size at $T_C=\SI{300}{\kelvin}$. $ZT_{avg}$ is the thermoelectric figure-of-merit at the average device temperature."}
```

### The Seebeck coefficient

The Seebeck coefficient is a measure of how much voltage can be induced by a temperature gradient, usually expressed in units of \si{\micro\volt\per\kelvin}. It is negative (positive) for n-type (p-type) semiconductors. The Seebeck coefficient for a few elements are listed in @tbl:snse-seebeck-coefficients. The Seebeck coefficient is highest for Selenium and Tellurium, while being vanishingly small for good conductors such as Gold and Platinum.

<!-- Note the use of a caption without citation first, because the list of tables doesn't support citations -->
\begin{table}
	\centering
	\caption[Seebeck coefficients for a few selected elements.]{Seebeck coefficients for a few selected elements\autocite{Rowe1995}.}
	\vspace{2mm}
	\begin{tabular}{c | c}
		Element & Seebeck Coefficient [\si{\micro \volt \per \kelvin}] \\ \hline\hline
		Selenium  & 895 \\ \hline
        Tellurium & 495 \\ \hline
        Silicon   & 435 \\ \hline
        Gold      & 1.5 \\ \hline
        Platinum  & -5   \\ \hline
        Bismuth   & -67 \\ \hline
	\end{tabular} 
	\label{tbl:snse-seebeck-coefficients}
\end{table}

For a solid that is well-described by parabolic electronic bands, the Seebeck coefficient can be expressed as [@Rittner1959]:
$$
    S = - \frac{k_B}{e} \left( \frac{5 F_{3/2}(\bar{\mu})}{3 F_{1/2}(\bar{\mu})} - \bar{\mu}\right)
    \label{eq:snse-seebeck}
$$
where $k_B$ is Boltzmann's constant, $e$ is the quantum of charge, $\bar{\mu}=\mu/k_B T$ is the reduced chemical potential (relative to the edge of the conduction band), and $F_i$ is the Fermi-Dirac function defined as:
$$
    F_i(\bar{\mu})= \int_0^\infty dx \frac{x^i}{e^{x - \bar{\mu}} + 1}
$$
The above equation makes it clear that the Seebeck coefficient is largely determined by the value of the reduced chemical potential, and thus is mostly sensitive to doping [@Hicks1993a].

### Electronic transport

The thermoelectric figure-of-merit (@eq:snse-zt) is directly proportional to the DC electrical conductivity $\sigma$. For a given material, the conductivity can be improved via charge-carrier doping[@Rowe1995;@Bennett2017], which is also known to negatively affect the Seebeck coefficient [@Sootsman2009;@Ikeda2010;@Fiorentini2016]. Therefore, the improvement of the term $S^2 \sigma$ via charge-carrier doping reaches a maximum at some optimum carrier concentration[@Bennett2017], which limits the overall potential for thermoelectric performance gains. 

There is another complication related to targeted improvements in DC conductivity. Increasing the electrical conductivity of any material also necessarily increases the electronic contribution of the thermal conductivity. In fact, the electronic contribution to the thermal conductivity is directly proportional to the DC electrical conductivity, a phenomenon known as the *Wiedemann-Franz* law [@Franz1853].

### Dimensionality-reduction

On the more practical, device-driven side of things, the thermoelectric figure-of-merit can be dramatically improved via nanostructuring. In two seminal papers, Hicks and Dresselhaus [@Hicks1993a;@Hicks1993b] described the desireable effects of dimensionality reduction (nanosheets and quantum wires) on the both $S^2 \sigma$ and $\kappa_l$. With respect to electronic transport, quantum confinement pseudo-discretizes the electronic density-of-states[@Heremans2013]; with the appropriate doping, the power factor[^powerfactor] $S^2 \sigma$ can be dramatically improved[@Hicks1996]. Nanostructuring also reduces the lattice thermal conductivity. The reduction in phonon mean-free-path at interfaces is appreciable[@Kapitza1971;@Rowe1974], and this is no different in nanostructured devices[@Joshi2008]. 

However, the maximum performance of nanostructured thermoelectrics -- while enhanced -- is still limited by the intrinsic thermoelectric performance of the underlying bulk material. There are also concerns regarding the longevity of nanostructured devices[@Minnich2009].

[^powerfactor]: The term power factor is an unfortunate misnomer, as it does not relate to energy flow over time. It is used here for historical coherence.

### Lattice thermal conductivity

The last major thermoelectric tuning parameter is the lattice thermal conductivity, which has been historically considered essentially independent from electronic structure changes in most of the litterature on thermoelectrics. The canonical way to alter the lattice heat transport properties from a given compound is to introduce defects via solid solutions[@Wang2013].

Which bulk compounds should be used as a starting point for further performance improvements? From the point-of-view of low lattice thermal conductivity, the ideal material has been called a *phonon glass--electron crystal* [@Rowe1995PGEC]. The prototypical phonon glass--electron crystal is a low-symmetry material with heavy atoms that are somewhat free to vibrate, resulting in an intrisically-low thermal conductivity (phonon glass), but with high-enough electron mobility (electron crystal). Well-known phonon glass--electron crystals include Bi$_2$Se$_3$[@Hicks1993a](also a topological insulator [@Sobota2012]), PbTe[@Harman1996], and more recently SnSe[@Zhao2014]. The phonon glass-electron crystal concept also applies to the light-harvesting lead-halide perovskites[@Miyata2017].

## Tin selenide

Tin selenide (SnSe) is a layered mono-chalcogen which has attracted attention in the past few years because of its very high thermoelectric figure of merit $ZT$, especially at high temperature, as reported by Zhao *et al.* [@Zhao2014] and others[@Zhao2016a;@Zhao2016b]. While the exact value of this figure of merit is debated [@Wei2016], SnSe remains one of the most promising bulk thermoelectric materials[^zt-fully-dense]. The axis-projected $ZT$ based on the work by Zhao *et al.* [@Zhao2014] is shown in @fig:snse-performance, along with the Seebeck coefficient and lattice thermal conductivity. SnSe is interesting not only from a scientific standpoint but also from a practical one, because it is lead-free and composed of earth-abundant elements. SnSe has also been suggested as an air-stable alternative to black phosphorus in real-world applications[@Li2014;@Ling2015;@Wu2016;@Seiler2021].

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-performance file="figures/snse/performance.py" caption="Thermoelectric performance characteristic of SnSe along all three crystallographic axes. **a)** Thermoelectric figure-of-merit $ZT$. **b)** Seebeck coefficient $S$. **c)** Lattice thermal conductivity $\kappa_l$."}
```

SnSe's high thermoelectric efficiency is thought to be primarily due to an anomalously-low lattice thermal conductivity, especially in-plane. At room temperature, $\kappa_l \sim \SI{1}{\watt\per\meter\per\kelvin}$ and it decreases further at higher temperatures [@Zhao2014]. The quasi-two-dimensional nature of SnSe is also a natural confinement of the charge carriers and provides a mechanism through which phonons are scattered, in line with the proposals by Hicks and Dresselhaus [@Hicks1993a]. Single-crystal tin selenide at ambient pressure is found in two related phases, both of which are layered[@Chattopadhyay1986]: the low-temperature $Pnma$ phase (space group number 62) and the high-temperature $Cmcm$ phase (space group number 63). The in-plane thermoelectric figure-of-merit increases dramatically near the transition temperature between the two phases, $T_c$, and is maximized in the high-temperature $Cmcm$ phase. 

The $Cmcm$ phase is a better thermoelectric for three reasons. First, it has a smaller band gap (\SI{0.4}{\electronvolt}) compared to the $Pnma$ phase (\SI{0.6}{\electronvolt}) which results in an increased carrier concentration. Second, $Cmcm$ exhibits higher carrier mobilities than the $Pnma$ phase [@Zhao2014]. Finally, the lattice thermal conductivity is also low in the $Cmcm$ phase. Together, these properties make $Cmcm$ the better thermoelectric form of SnSe.

### Lattice instability and zone-center soft modes

In the high-temperature $Cmcm$ phase, the lattice is stabilized by two soft, anharmonically-coupled phonon modes: an optical mode at $\vect{\Gamma}$ polarized along the stacking axis $\vect{a}$ and an acoustic mode polarized in the $\vect{b}$--$\vect{c}$ plane at $\vect{Y}$[@Skelton2016;@Hong2019]. The in-plane section of the Brillouin zone is shown in @fig:snse-bz for context. When cooling towards the phase transition temperature $T_c$, both modes freeze, which reduces the Brillouin zone volume as every $\vect{Y}$ point in the $Cmcm$ phase becomes zone-center in the $Pnma$ phase. Below $T_c$, the two anharmonically-coupled modes of the $Cmcm$ phase combine into a single soft mode called $A_g$, which is polarized mostly along the $\vect{c}$ axis with a small component along the stacking axis $\vect{a}$. This $A_g$ soft mode in the $Pnma$ phase hardens when cooling away from $T_c$ [@Chattopadhyay1986;@Dove1997].

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-bz file="figures/snse/bz.py" caption="In-plane section of the Brillouin zone of SnSe."}
```

TODO: include band structure which shows softening

There are actually many soft-modes with characteristics similar to the lowest energy $A_g$ mode that soften towards the phase transition; $A_g$ simply happens to be the lowest-energy one, and therefore freezes at the phase transition. Work by Gong *et al.*[@Gong2020] and others[@Liu2018] has shown the temperature-dependence of multiple modes. Of interest is the $B_g$ mode (\SI{14}{\milli\electronvolt} at \SI{300}{\kelvin}), which is also polarized along the $Pnma$ lattice distortion just like the $A_g$ mode, but displays one of the most pronounced temperature-dependence across multiple two-dimensional systems such as black phosphorus, monolayer and few-layers MoS$_2$, and graphene.

### Electronic structure

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-electronic-structure file="figures/snse/estructure.py" caption="Qualitative diagram of the in-plane electronic dispersion $E(\vect{k})$ for tin selenide at room temperature."}
```

The electronic structure of SnSe is also of interest. The in-plane electronic dispersion at room temperature based on calculations[@Cuong2015;@Ma2018;@Wei2019] is shown in @fig:snse-electronic-structure. The valence band of SnSe is primarily composed of Se-$4p$ orbitals, while the conduction band is primarily composed of Sn-$5p$ orbitals[@Li2015;@Cuong2015;@Kutorasinski2015;@Hong2019]. Moreover, different valence and conduction pockets in momentum space correspond to particular $p$-orbital polarizations [@Cuong2015]. SnSe is a p-type semiconductor with an indirect band gap in the $Pnma$ phase, and a direct band gap in the $Cmcm$ phase. In the $Pnma$ phase in particular, the valence band maximum and conduction band minimum are located near the $\vect{Z}$ and $\vect{Y}$ points, respectively[@Ma2018]. The shape of the valence band maximum near $\vect{Z}$ -- known as "pudding mold" shape -- is thought to strongly improve the power factor $S^2\sigma$[@Kuroki2007]. 

Interestingly, the *nature* of the band gap is strongly-dependent on the in-plane lattice parameters. Towards $T_c$, the $\vect{a}$ and $\vect{b}$ axes expand, while the $\vect{c}$ axis contracts towards the length of the $\vect{b}$ axis [@Chattopadhyay1986]. At \SI{300}{\kelvin}, the conduction band minimum is located at $\frac{2}{3}Y$ and is composed of Sn-$5p_y$ orbitals. At \SI{600}{\kelvin}, the conduction band minimum switches to a pocket of Sn-$5p_x$ at $\vect{\Gamma}$[@Wei2019]. The valence band maximum for the $Pnma$ phase remains near $\vect{Z}$ across the temperature range and is composed of Se-$4p_z$ orbitals[^cuong]. Above the phase transition temperature $T_c$, the valence band minimum moves to the $\vect{\Gamma}$ point, and thus the band gap becomes direct.

### Structural parameters

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-structure file="figures/snse/structure.py" caption="Atomic structure for two phases of SnSe. **a)** $Pnma$ (low-temperature) phase. **b)** $Cmcm$ (high-temperature) phase."}
```

The low-temperature $Pnma$ phase is defined by the lattice vectors $\vect{a} = a ~ \vect{e}_1$, $\vect{b} = b ~ \vect{e}_2$, and $\vect{c} = c ~ \vect{e}_3$ where $a=\SI{11.42}{\angstrom}$, $b=\SI{4.19}{\angstrom}$, and $c=\SI{4.46}{\angstrom}$. The vectors $\set{ \vect{e}_i }$ are understood to be the usual Euclidean vectors. The atomic positions are for the $Pnma$ phase are:
$$
\begin{pmatrix}
    \vect{\text{Se}}_1 \\
    \vect{\text{Se}}_2 \\
    \vect{\text{Se}}_3 \\
    \vect{\text{Se}}_4 \\
    \vect{\text{Sn}}_1 \\
    \vect{\text{Sn}}_2 \\
    \vect{\text{Sn}}_3 \\
    \vect{\text{Sn}}_4 
\end{pmatrix}
=
\begin{pmatrix}
    0.14 & \sfrac{3}{4} & 0.52\\
    0.36 & \sfrac{1}{4} & 0.02\\
    0.64 & \sfrac{3}{4} & 0.98\\
    0.86 & \sfrac{1}{4} & 0.48\\
    0.12 & \sfrac{1}{4} & 0.09\\
    0.38 & \sfrac{3}{4} & 0.59\\
    0.62 & \sfrac{1}{4} & 0.41\\
    0.88 & \sfrac{3}{4} & 0.91
\end{pmatrix}
\begin{pmatrix}
    \vect{a} \\
    \vect{b} \\
    \vect{c}
\end{pmatrix}
$$
In monolayer form, SnSe is ferroelectric[@Wu2016;@Fei2016].

The lattice vectors for the *conventional cell* of high-temperature phase $Cmcm$ are given by $\vect{a} = a ~ \vect{e}_1$, $\vect{b} = b ~ \vect{e}_2$, and $\vect{c} = b ~ \vect{e}_3$ where $a=\SI{11.71}{\angstrom}$ and $b=\SI{4.31}{\angstrom}$. The atomic positions in fractional coordinates are:
$$
\begin{pmatrix}
    \vect{\text{Se}}_1 \\
    \vect{\text{Se}}_2 \\
    \vect{\text{Se}}_3 \\
    \vect{\text{Se}}_4 \\
    \vect{\text{Sn}}_1 \\
    \vect{\text{Sn}}_2 \\
    \vect{\text{Sn}}_3 \\
    \vect{\text{Sn}}_4 
\end{pmatrix}
=
\begin{pmatrix}
    0.14 & \sfrac{1}{2}  & \sfrac{3}{4}\\
    0.36 & 0             & \sfrac{1}{4}\\
    0.64 & 0             & \sfrac{3}{4}\\
    0.86 & \sfrac{1}{2}  & \sfrac{1}{4}\\
    0.12 & 0             & \sfrac{1}{4}\\
    0.88 & 0             & \sfrac{3}{4}\\
    0.38 & \sfrac{1}{2}  & \sfrac{3}{4}\\
    0.62 & \sfrac{1}{2}  & \sfrac{1}{4}
\end{pmatrix}
\begin{pmatrix}
    \vect{a} \\
    \vect{b} \\
    \vect{c}
\end{pmatrix}
$$
The primitive cell for the $Pnma$ phase is twice the size of the primitive cell for the $Cmcm$ phase. For convenience, the conventional cells are used throughout this chapter. The atomic structures are shown in @fig:snse-structure.

## Experimental methods

### Bulk crystal growth

Sample preparation involves two steps. Bulk crystals of SnSe were first synthesized, followed by processed by which ultrathin samples were produced.

Bulk SnSe crystals (\SI{20}{\gram}) were synthesized by mixing appropriate ratios of high purity starting materials (Sn chunk, 99.999\%, American Elements, USA and Se shot, 99.999\%, 5N Plus, Canada) in \SI{13}{\milli\meter} diameter quartz tube. The tube was flame-sealed at a residual pressure of $\SI{1e-4}{\mmHg}$, then slowly heated to \SI{1223}{\kelvin} over \SI{10}{\hour}, soaked at this temperature for 6h and subsequently furnace cooled to room temperature. The obtained ingot was crushed into powder and flame-sealed in a quartz tube, which was placed into another, bigger, flame-sealed quartz tube. A crystal with dimensions of $\sim$\SI{13}{\milli\meter} (diameter) $\times$ \SI{20}{\milli\meter} (length) was obtained.

### Preparation of electron-transparent samples

In order to obtain ultrathin samples suitable for ultrafast electron scattering experiments, two methods were tried. Ultramicrotomy yielded suitable samples, but the author wanted to rule out the effect of strain induced by the sample preparation. To this end, a sample was also prepared via mechanical exfoliation.

#### Ultramicrotomy

Six samples were prepared via ultramicrotomy, a sample preparation technique which involves the cutting of samples using a diamond blade. While this technique has mostly been used to prepare organic samples for cryo-electron microscopy, it has been successfully used in the past decade to prepare samples of two-dimensional materials such as 4H-TaSe$_2$[@Erasmus2012] and 1T-TaS$_2$[@Eichberger2013]. The author initially tried ultramicrotomy to prepare samples of 1T-TiSe$_2$[@Otto2021].

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-ultramicrotomy-femr file="figures/snse/ultramicrotome.py" caption="Ultramicrotome setup used to prepare SnSe samples. Crystals embedded in epoxy are mounted, and a diamond knife is used to shave a section. Sections slide down into a boat filled with water, where they are lated fished out. This image was provided by S. K. Sears from McGill University's Facility for Electron Microscopy Research."}
```

First, a bulk crystal of SnSe is embedded in epoxy, with the cutting plane parallel to the material layers. The surface of the bulk crystal is trimmed with a \ang{45} diamond blade to reveal fresh cutting surface. Sections are then cut with a sharper, \ang{35} diamond blade which then fall in a small water container. Floating sections are then fished out with a carbon-coated TEM grid. The assembly is shown in @fig:snse-ultramicrotomy-femr. The effect of cutting on the embedded crystals is shown in @fig:snse-ultramicrotomy. 

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-ultramicrotomy file="figures/snse/sample.py" caption="Stages of sample preparation via ultramicrotome. **a)** Prism of SnSe embedded in epoxy showing large crystalline plateaus. **b)** Surface of embedded SnSe prism after trimming with a \ang{45} diamond knife. **c)** \SI{60}{\nano\meter} section of SnSe cut with a \ang{35} diamond knife. The images were provided by H. Gnaegi from Diatome, Ltd."}
```

In the end, six samples were produced: three with a thickness of \SI{70}{\nano\meter} and three with a thickness of \SI{90}{\nano\meter}, each with an area of approximately \SI{200 x 200}{\micro\meter}. 

#### Mechanical exfoliation

An ultrathin flake of SnSe was prepared via mechanical exfoliation, a procedure that is analogous to the work by Novoselov *et al.*[@Novoselov2004] A small chunk of SnSe was embedded in CrystalBond glue, on a standard \SI{3}{\milli\meter} copper TEM grid with a line spacing of 200 lines per inch. The embedded chunk was then exfoliated repeatedly using ordinary adhesive tape, until the embedded flake was translucent when observed with an optical microscope. The glue was washed away with acetone. This procedure resulted in a sample with an area of approximately \SI{50 x 50}{\micro\meter}.

The sample thickness was determined by taking the ratio of various reflections at thicknesses of \SI{70}{\nano\meter} and \SI{90}{\nano\meter} -- correcting for sample volume and electron flux -- and extrapolating to the intensity of the reflections in the exfoliated sample. Using this procedure, the thickness of the exfoliated sample was estimated to be $\SI{45 \pm 5}{\nano\meter}$.

### Experimental parameters

The experiments presented in this chapter used the same experimental geometry that is presented in @sec:experimental_setup. Ultrashort laser pulses of \SI{1.55}{\electronvolt} light were shone on the sample surface, with an incident angle of \ang{10}, at $t=t_0$, on SnSe samples oriented in the $[100]$ direction. To ensure that the samples had enough time to cool down after every laser shot, the repetition rate of experiments were varied from \SIrange{50}{1000}{\hertz}, but no changes were measured beyond the degradation of signal-to-noise. Therefore, a \SI{1000}{\hertz} repetition rate was used. 

Compressed electron bunches of $10^6$ electrons per bunch were transmitted through the sample at $t=t_0 + \tau$, where the time-delay $\tau$ was scanned from \SIrange{-10}{30}{\pico\second}. The total range of time-delay $\tau$ was limited compared to experiments presented in @sec:graphite (\SIrange{-40}{680}{\pico\second}) because the diffuse signals are much weaker in SnSe; limiting the total range of time-delay allowed for more averaging. The longest measurement presented in this chapter was taken over \SI{72}{\hour}. This was only possible thanks to the advancements in laser-RF synchronization brought by work by the author in Otto *et al.*[@Otto2017], which completely eliminated the drift in $t_0$ over the experiment duration.

The samples were photoexcited with a pump spot with a full-width at half-maximum that was at least twice the width of the sample, ensuring nearly-uniform illumination of the sample. The samples were photoexcited with photoexcitation densities ranging from \SIrange{6.6}{13.2}{\milli\joule\per\square\centi\meter}. The absorbed energy will be discussed further in this chapter. The scattering patterns were collected with a Gatan Ultrascan 895 camera, consisting of a 2.54 × 2.54 \si{\square\cm} scintillator fiber-coupled to a 2048 px × 2048 px charge-coupled detector (CCD) placed \SI{29.39}{\centi\meter} away from the sample. Example static diffraction patterns are shown in @fig:snse-diff-static.

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-diff-static file="figures/snse/diff-static.py" caption="Comparison of static diffraction patterns from samples prepared via two techniques. **a)** \SI{90}{\nano\meter}-thick sample prepared via ultramicrotome. **b)** \SI{45}{\nano\meter}-thick samples prepared via mechanical exfoliation."}
```

Contrary to the symmetrization procedure described in @sec:graphite-data-acquisition and shown in @fig:graphite-static, SnSe only has a two-fold symmetry in-plane. Therefore, the data presented in this chapter was *not* symmetrized.

## Ultrafast electron scattering measurements

The experimental results are presented in this section. The description will start with a presentation of the diffraction results, followed by the diffuse intensity dynamics.

### Bragg peak profile analysis{#sec:snse-bragg-peak-profile}

An important point which will anchor the discussion below is that the lattice dimensions are not affected by photoexcitation in the range of time-delay explored herein ($<$\SI{30}{\pico\second}). All Bragg peaks were fit with a Voigt profile[@Ida2000] at each time-delay, and the changes to their positions and profile, were tracked. The results are presented in @fig:snse-peak-profiles for a few representative reflections. It is clear that no lattice expansion occurred in the measurements, which would have manifested itself as a change in Bragg peak position. Moreover, no lattice strain was measured, which would appear as a change in Bragg peak width[@Fultz2013Lineshapes]. These checks are important given the strong dependence of SnSe's electronic bands on lattice dimensions[@Wei2019] and strain[@Cuong2015].

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-peak-profiles file="figures/snse/widths.py" caption="Dynamics of the width and position of various Bragg peaks following photoexcitation. For every time-delay, Bragg peaks were fit with a Gaussian function. In the left column, the change in full-width at half-maximum $\Delta \sigma$ is shown over time. In the right column, the absolute shift in the center position of the peak $\Delta x_c$ is shown, as a percentage of the average full-width at half-maximum $\bar{\sigma}$. For all plots, the error bars represent the covariance of fit parameter."}
```

### Debye-Waller dynamics

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-dwaller file="figures/snse/dwaller.py" caption="Differential intensity dynamics on Bragg peaks for reflections either parallel to $\vect{b}^\star$ or $\vect{c}^\star$. Reflections parallel to $\vect{b}^\star$ are well-described by a single exponential with time-constant \SI{4 \pm 1}{\pico\second}. However, reflections parallel to $\vect{c}^\star$ have a biexponential character the with time-constants \SI{400 \pm 100}{\femto\second} and \SI{4 \pm 1}{\pico\second}. Error bars represent the fluctuations before photoexcitation ($\tau < 0$) but are too small to see."}
```

The Bragg peaks were modified in one important way: a photoinduced amplitude change was measured, attributable to the transient Debye-Waller effect (@sec:scattering-lattice-waves). In-plane reflections can be separated into two categories: the reflections which are nearly parallel to the $\vect{c}^\star$ axis, and the reflections which are not. For the reflections which are within $\sim\ang{45}$ degrees of the $\vect{c}^\star$ axis, the amplitude of the Bragg peak follows a Debye-Waller suppression with two time-constants \SI{400 \pm 100}{\femto\second} and \SI{4 \pm 1}{\pico\second}. For reflections which are not nearly parallel to $\vect{c}^\star$, only the slower time-constant is present. @fig:snse-dwaller shows the comparison between the amplitude suppression for reflections which are exactly parallel to $\vect{b}^\star$ ($\set{ (020), (040), ...}$) and reflections which are exactly parallel to $\vect{c}^\star$ ($\set{ (002), (004), ...}$). 

Recall from @eq:scattering-debye-waller that the Debye-Waller factor reports on the average mean-square-displacement of atoms $\langle |\vect{u}|^2 \rangle$ along the direction of the scattering vector $\vect{q}$. The fact that there is a fast component of the transient Debye-Waller dynamics in Bragg peaks nearly parallel to $\vect{c}^\star$ indicates that the mean-square-displacement of atoms along the $\vect{c}$ axis -- i.e. the $Pnma$ lattice distortion -- is particularly affected by photoexcitation. The increase in mean-square-displacement should be reflected in the diffuse intensity across the Brillouin zone, which is presented further below.

### Large-wavevector phonons

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-highsym file="figures/snse/highsym.py" caption="Comparison of the diffuse intensity dynamics at various in-plane high-symmetry points. The fit to the average across the entire Brillouin zone where $|\vect{k}| > \SI{0.285}{\per\angstrom}$ is shown as a dashed black trace for reference."}
```

The slow dynamics (\SI{4 \pm 1}{\pico\second}) in the Debye-Waller dynamics are correlated with the uniform rise of diffuse intensity away from zone-center. @fig:snse-highsym shows the differential intensity changes at three high-symmetry points in the Brillouin zone: $\vect{Y}$, $\vect{Z}$, and $\vect{T}$. See @fig:snse-bz for the geometry of the in-plane section of the Brillouin zone. The diffuse intensity from the Brillouin zone near multiple reflection was averaged to increase signal-to-noise. The three in-plane points show the exact same dependence: a single exponential rise with time-constant $\SI{3.6 \pm 0.6}{\pico\second}$. For reference, the average across the Brillouin zone away from the zone-center ($|\vect{k}| > \SI{0.285}{\per\angstrom}$) is shown.

### Small wavevectors phonons{#sec:snse-small-wavevectors}

The rapid increase in mean-square-displacement following excitation inferred from the Debye-Waller effect is not due to large wavevector phonons, as this rapid increase is not seen in the diffuse intensity away from zone-center. Recall that the $Pnma \to Cmcm$ phase transition involves the renormalization of many zone-center transverse optical modes polarized in the direction of the lattice distortion ($\vect{c}$ axis). 

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-diffuse-direction file="figures/snse/diffuse-direction.py" caption="Comparison of the differential intensity dynamics near reflections that are either almost parallel to $\vect{b}^\star$ or $\vect{c}^\star$. Near reflections almost parallel to $\vect{c}^\star$ (e.g. $(004)$, $(01\bar{7})$, etc.), a fast initial rise in intensity is observed which is not measured close to reflections almost parallel to $\vect{b}^\star$ (e.g. $(040)$, $(051)$, etc.)"}
```

Diffuse intensity dynamics correlated with the fast part of the Debye-Waller dynamics are indeed observed near zone-center, for reflections which are nearly parallel to $\vect{c}^{\star}$. The one-phonon structure factors are expected to be large for the transverse modes polarized in the $\vect{c}$ direction near reflections that are almost parallel to the $\vect{c}^\star$ axis. @fig:snse-diffuse-direction shows the integration of the total scattering intensity around reflections that are either nearly parallel to $\vect{b}^\star$ or $\vect{c}^\star$. 

These signals will be isolated appropriately and discussed in the next section.

## Dynamics of $\vect{c}$-polarized transverse modes

In this section, the initial findings presented in @sec:snse-small-wavevectors will be developed further. There are two tasks at hand: confirm that the dynamics near zone-center are due to diffuse scattering, and separate isolate this trace from the nearby Bragg peak dynamics.

### Confirmation of diffuse dynamics via multiple scattering

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-forbidden-location file="figures/snse/static-forbidden.py" caption="Location of reflections which are forbidden in the $Pnma$ phase. These reflections are visible due to double diffraction."}
```

The intensity dynamics shown in @fig:snse-diffuse-direction can be confirmed to be due to dynamics in the diffuse intensity by performing experiments on a thick sample. Note that the thicker SnSe sample prepared by ultramicrotome show some degree of double diffraction, in the form of *forbidden reflections*[@Fultz2013ForbiddenReflections]. The $Pnma$ space group has a non-zero structure factor (@eq:scattering-potential-crystal) for following in-plane reflections:
$$
    \set{ (0kl) \mid k + l \in 2\mathbb{Z} }
$$
where $2\mathbb{Z}$ is understood to be the set of even integers. Forbidden reflections present in the thicker SnSe samples are indicated in @fig:snse-forbidden-location. While double diffraction is visible, the cross-section of a scattering event composed of a diffraction and diffuse scattering event is much less likely (see @sec:scattering-multiple). A comparison of the differential intensity dynamics near allowed and forbidden reflections is shown in @fig:snse-forbidden. For both allowed and forbidden reflections, only those which are nearly parallel to the $\vect{c}^\star$ axis were used. It is clear that the fast intensity increase is not present near the zone-center of reflections which result from double diffraction, which confirms that the ultrafast rise in intensity initially shown in @sec:snse-small-wavevectors is diffuse in nature.

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-forbidden file="figures/snse/forbidden.py" caption="Differential intensity dynamics in a ring near the Bragg peak of allowed and forbidden reflections. See @sec:snse-regions for a discussion on the geometry of the integration region."}
```

### Partitioning of the Brillouin zone{#sec:snse-regions}

In order to be more quantitative about the diffuse intensity dynamics at zone center, the intensity dynamics of the Bragg peaks need to be removed. Directly on the Bragg peaks, the absolute intensity change observed in @fig:snse-dwaller is 10^5^ times larger than the diffuse rise observed in @fig:snse-diffuse-direction. The transient Debye-Waller effect suppresses diffracted intensity, but does not change the peak profile. Therefore, there must be a region in reciprocal space -- far enough away from the peak location -- where the absolute change in peak intensity due to the transient Debye-Waller effect is on the same order as the diffuse rise.

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-size-comparison file="figures/snse/size-comparison.py" caption="Comparison of intensity dynamics integrated in a region defined by @eq:snse-region-2 for multiple values of $r$. For each value of $r$, the associated integration region is shown on the right. The dynamics are all well-described by a biexponential trace with a fast rise and slow decay. The fitting results are summarized in @tbl:snse-size-comparison."}
```

By looking in a *ring* around Bragg peaks, the intensity dynamics can be separated between Debye-Waller (inner disk) and diffuse intensity near zone-center (outer torus) parametrized by:
\begin{align}
    \Omega_{\text{region 1}} &= \left\{ \vect{k} \mid |\vect{k}| < r \right\} \\
    \Omega_{\text{region 2}} &= \left\{ \vect{k} \mid r \leq |\vect{k}| \leq 2 r \right\} \label{eq:snse-region-2}\\
    \Omega_{\text{region 3}} &= \left\{ \vect{k} \mid 2 r < |\vect{k}| \right\}
    \label{eq:snse-regions}
\end{align}
The amplitude of the diffuse rise near zone-center is affected by the parameter $r$, but the time-constants are not. @fig:snse-size-comparison shows the intensity dynamics when integrating in region 2, for various parameters of $r$. In all cases, the differential intensity dynamics are well-described by a biexponential function. The relative amplitudes of the two exponentials determines the overall shape of the curves, as all the time-constants are comparable. The fitting results are summarized in @tbl:snse-size-comparison. The sizes of the inner and outer radii which maximize the amplitude of the diffuse rise are $r = \SI{0.114}{\per\angstrom}$ and $r = \SI{0.228}{\per\angstrom}$; this geometry is shown in @fig:snse-geometry. Region 1 and 2 are fairly small, considering that the in-plane Brillouin zone is \SI{1.49 x 1.41}{\per\angstrom} in size.


```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-geometry file="figures/snse/geometry.py" caption="Intensity integration geometry which allows to distinguish between physical processes. **a)** Static diffraction patterh of SnSe. **b)** Zoom on the $(002)$ reflection showing three integration regions: the Debye-Waller dynamics (region 1), the small-wavevector diffuse dynamics (region 2), and the large wavevector diffuse dynamics (region 3). **c)** Linecut of the static intensity along the solid horizontal line in panel b), showing the diffraction peak profile. The Bragg peak is fit with a Voigt profile (solid black line) with a full-width at half-max of \SI{0.158}{\per\angstrom}."}
```

<!-- Note that raw latex references need to be used in latex tables, which includes a manual label (e.g. Equation \ref{...}) -->
\begin{table}
	\centering
	\caption{Comparison of the time-constants determined from the diffuse intensity dynamics for various dimensions of region 2 in Figure \ref{fig:snse-size-comparison}. The parameter $r$ defines the integration region with Equation \ref{eq:snse-region-2}.}
	\vspace{2mm}
	\begin{tabular}{c | c | c}
		r [\si{\per\angstrom}] & $\tau_1$ [\si{\femto\second}] & $\tau_2$ [\si{\pico\second}] \\ \hline\hline
        0.076 & $475 \pm 120$ & $3.5 \pm 0.4$ \\ \hline
        0.114 & $300 \pm 100$ & $2.9 \pm 0.5$ \\ \hline
        0.152 & $600 \pm 220$ & $2.9 \pm 0.8$ \\ \hline
        0.190 & $600 \pm 270$ & $2.9 \pm 1.3$ \\ \hline
	\end{tabular} 
	\label{tbl:snse-size-comparison}
\end{table}

With the appropriate partitioning of the Brillouin zone (@fig:snse-geometry), it is possible to separate the dynamics of the Bragg peak from the diffuse intensity for low wavevectors ($\SI{0.114}{\per\angstrom} \leq |\vect{k}| \leq \SI{0.228}{\per\angstrom}$). The diffuse dynamics near zone-center presented in the previous section are definitely affected to some degree by the dynamics of the nearby Bragg peak. However, because it has been shown that the Bragg peak profiles are constant, the Debye-Waller dynamics from region 1 can be subtracted. The results are presented in @fig:snse-clean-traces. Most importantly, this reveals that the slow diffuse intensity decrease near zone-center is *not due* to the nearby Bragg peak, but is rather intrinsic to the diffuse dynamics.

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-clean-traces file="figures/snse/clean-traces.py" caption="Transient ultrafast electron scattering intensity at various points in the Brillouin zone. The integration geometry is shown in @fig:snse-geometry and defined by @eq:snse-regions with $r=\SI{0.114}{\per\angstrom}$. The decrease of intensity directly on the Bragg peak where $\vect{q} || \vect{c}^\star$ shows the expected transient Debye-Waller effect with fast and slow components, while the Debye-Waller suppression on Bragg peaks where $\vect{q} || \vect{b}^\star$ only displays slow exponential behavior. Average transient diffuse intensity across region $\Omega_3$ is shown for context. Error bars represent the standard error in the mean of intensity before time-zero, but are generally smaller than the markers."}
```

### Transient mean-square-displacement due to strongly-coupled modes

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-displacement-fluence file="figures/snse/displacement.py" caption="Increase in mean-square-displacement of all atoms $\Delta \langle u^2 \rangle$, due to the change in vibrational amplitude of the strongly-coupled small-wavevector $\vect{c}$-polarized modes exclusively. Boxes are used to represent error bars along both axes. Color bar shows associated photocarrier density $N_{\gamma}$."}
```

The fast component of the transient Debye-Waller dynamics (@fig:snse-dwaller) can be used to infer the change in vibrational amplitudes due exclusively to the strongly-coupled small-wavevector modes. The time-resolved suppression of Bragg intensity due to atomic vibrations is given by the following expression (@eq:scattering-diffracted-intensity-finite-temp):
\begin{align}
    \frac{I_0(\vect{q},\tau) - I_0(\vect{q},0)}{I_0(\vect{q},0)} 
        &\equiv \Delta I_0(\vect{q},\tau) \nonumber \\
        &= \frac{e^{-2M(\vect{q},\tau)} - e^{-2M(\vect{q},0)}}{e^{-2M(\vect{q},0)}} \nonumber \\
        &=e^{-2[M(\vect{q},\tau) - M(\vect{q},0)]} - 1
\end{align}
Rearranging terms:
$$
    - \frac{1}{2} \ln \left[1 + \Delta I_0(\vect{q},t) \right] = M(\vect{q}, \tau) - M(\vect{q}, 0)
$$
In this formulation, $M$ is the appropriate average of all atom-specific $W_s$ suppression factors from @eq:scattering-debye-waller, for which there is no general expression for diatomic crystals such as SnSe[@Warren1990DebyeWaller]. 
The fast component of the transient Debye-Waller dynamics are only visible for reflections nearly parallel to $\vect{c}^\star$, which informs on the atomic displacement in the $\vect{c}$ direction. Since the Debye-Waller suppression is small ($\sim 1\%$, @fig:snse-dwaller), the harmonic approximation can be used. This approximation states that if atoms are vibrating very close to their equilibrium position, the potential is harmonic [@Warren1990Harmonic], and the Debye-Waller factor $M$ is given by:
$$
    M(\vect{q}, \tau) = \frac{1}{2} |\vect{q}|^2 \langle |\bar{\vect{u}} \cdot \vect{e}_3|^2 \rangle
$$
where the symbol $\bar{\vect{u}}$ signifies the atomic displacement averaged over the atoms in the unit cell, and $\vect{e}_3$ is the unit vector in the $\vect{c}$ direction. Then, the transient mean-square-displacement in the $\vect{c}$ direction, $\Delta \langle |\bar{\vect{u}} \cdot \vect{c}|^2 \rangle \equiv \Delta \langle u_c^2 \rangle$, is related to the Bragg intensity at zone center as:
$$
    \Delta \langle u_c^2 \rangle = -\frac{\ln \left[1 + \Delta I_0(\vect{q},t) \right]}{|\vect{q}|^2}
$$
for $\vect{q}$ nearly parallel to $\vect{c}^\star$. The associated error $\sigma_u$ as a function of the pre-photoexcitation transient intensity error $\sigma_I$ is given by[@Bevington2003error]:
$$
    \sigma_u = \left| \frac{\partial \Delta \langle u_c^2 \rangle}{\partial I}\right|  \sigma_I = \frac{-\sigma_I}{|\vect{q}|^2 \left[1 + \Delta I_0(\vect{q},t) \right]}
$$
The extracted change in atomic displacement along the $\vect{c}$ axis due to small-wavevector $\vect{c}$-polarized transverse modes as a function of fluence is shown in @fig:snse-displacement-fluence.  

## Discussion

In this section, the interpretation of the observations presented previously are discussed. 

Consider first the ultrafast diffuse increase near zone-center. Recall the definition for the diffuse intensity (@eq:scattering-diffuse-intensity):
$$
    I_1(\vect{q}) \propto \sum_{\lambda} \frac{n_{\lambda}(\vect{k}) + 1/2}{\omega_{\lambda}(\vect{k})} |F_{1\lambda}(\vect{q})|^2
$$
This equation implies an increase of diffuse intensity is due to an increase in $(n_{\lambda}+1/2) / \omega_{\lambda}$ for one or more modes. Two potential causes of a rise are identified:

1. Selective mode-heating ($\uparrow n_{\lambda}$). Phonon modes may be populated selectively as the electronic system thermalizes. This is similar to the physics that was described in @sec:graphite.
2. Frequency renormalization ($\downarrow \omega_{\lambda}$). There are multiple zone-center phonon modes polarized in the $\vect{c}$ direction which are known to soften towards the phase transition. The opposite has been observed by the author in TiSe$_2$ in Otto *et al.*[@Otto2021], where the photodoping of carriers selectively stiffened a soft zone-boundary phonon.

Due to the energy-integrative nature of ultrafast electron diffuse scattering measurements, it is not possible to distinguish between these two types of dynamics. In analogy to @eq:scattering-displacement, terms of the form $n_{\lambda} + 1/2 / \omega_{\lambda}$ are directly proportional to vibrational amplitude. In this formulation, the fast diffuse intensity rise at $\vect{\Gamma}$ is due to an increase in vibrational amplitude of one or more small-wavevector phonon modes polarized in the direction of the $Pnma$ lattice distortion. 

### Electron-phonon coupling

Given that the energy contained in pump pulses are absorbed by electrons, and that ultrafast electron scattering measures the subsequent lattice response, it is natural to ask how electron-phonon coupling can explain the experiments. The electron-phonon scattering rate $1/ \tau_{\lambda\vect{k}_p}$, or rate of energy transfer between electrons at all wavevectors and phonons at wavevector $\vect{k}_p$, is given by[@Fan2018]:
$$
   1/ \tau_{\lambda\vect{k}_p} = -\frac{2 \pi}{\hbar} \text{Im}\left[ \Sigma_{\lambda}(\vect{k}_p) \right]
   \label{eq:snse-ep-scattering-rate}
$$
where $a$ and $b$ label electron bands, $\vect{k}_e$ ($\vect{k}_p$) is the electronic (phonon) wavevector, and $\Sigma_{\lambda}(\vect{k}_p)$ is the self-energy for phonons with quantum numbers $(\lambda, \vect{k}_p)$. The phonon self-energy also defines how vibrational frequencies are renormalized from $\omega^0_{\lambda}$ to $\omega_{\lambda}$ due to electron-phonon interactions[@Ando2006]: 
$$
    \frac{\omega_{\lambda}(\vect{k}_p)^2}{\omega^0_{\lambda}(\vect{k}_p)^2} - 1 = \frac{2}{\hbar \omega_0} \text{Re} \left[ \Sigma_{\lambda}(\vect{k}_p)\right]
$${#eq:snse-ep-renormalization}
The renormalization of phonon vibrational frequencies due to strong electron-phonon coupling was encountered in @sec:graphite-phonon-landscape in the form of Kohn anomalies[@Kohn1959].

Both a large electron-phonon scattering rate (i.e. selective mode-heating) and phonon frequency renormalization can lead to am increase in the phonon vibrational amplitude measured in SnSe (@eq:scattering-displacement). Regardless of the physical cause of the increased vibrational amplitude (mode-heating or phonon renormalization), the consequences boil down to an ultrafast modification of the phonon self-energy. Computing the phonon self-energy for particular situations is arduous[@Mahan2000SelfEnergy;@Giustino2017], but in the Migdal approximation[@Migdal1958;@Noffsinger2010]: 
$$
    \Sigma_{\lambda}(\vect{k}_p) = 
        \sum_{a, b} \int \frac{d\vect{k}_e}{(2\pi)^3} ~ | g^{\lambda}_{ab}(\vect{k}_p, \vect{k}_e) |^2 ~ \frac{f\left[\epsilon_{a}(\vect{k}_e)\right] - f\left[\epsilon_b(\vect{k}_e + \vect{k}_p)\right]}{\epsilon_a(\vect{k}_e) - \epsilon_b(\vect{k}_e + \vect{k}_p) - \hbar \omega_{\lambda}(\vect{k}_p) + i\eta}
$${#eq:snse-phonon-self-energy}
where $a$ and $b$ label electron bands, $\vect{k}_e$ ($\vect{k}_p$) is the electronic (phonon) wavevector, $f(\epsilon)$ is the electronic energy distribution, and $\eta$ is an infinitesimally-small number. The electronic energy distribution $f(\epsilon)$ might be non-thermal in general, and indeed is non-thermal on the timescale of the experiments presented herein. The electron-phonon coupling tensor, $g^{\lambda}_{ab}(\vect{k}_e, \vect{k}_p)$, describes the rate of inelastic single electron scattering between bands $a$ and $b$ through the creation or annihilation of a phonon with quantum numbers $(\lambda, \vect{k}_p)$. The electron-phonon coupling tensor $g$ was encountered in @sec:introduction-epc and @sec:graphite-coupling-constants.

The electron-phonon scattering rate (@eq:snse-ep-scattering-rate) and phonon renormalization (@eq:snse-ep-renormalization) are therefore proportional to the $\vect{k}_e$-integrated electron-phonon coupling tensor via @eq:snse-phonon-self-energy. Photoexcitation perturbs the electronic energy distribution ($f$), and this non-thermal energy distribution will scatter to phonons $(\lambda, \vect{k}_p)$ based on the strength of $g$. Therefore, whether the diffuse intensity rise near zone-center is due to selective mode heating, phonon renormalization, or both, is not an important distinction. The diffuse intensity rise at small wavevectors can be associated with strong electron-phonon coupling to small wavevector modes polarized in the $\vect{c}$ direction and at least an order-of-magnitude lower coupling everywhere else in the plane.

This is not entirely unexpected. Calculations by Ma *et al.*[@Ma2018] have revealed that the mobility of electrons and holes is strongly-modified at zone-center due to polar optical modes. Calculations by Caruso *et al.*[@Caruso2019] have reported strong electron-phonon coupling to zone-center optical modes polarized in the $\vect{c}$ direction, most importantly the $B_u$ (\SI{8}{\milli\electronvolt}) and the $B_g$ (\SI{20}{\milli\electronvolt}) modes. The results presented in this chapter corroborate these findings, at least qualitatively.

#### The Mott-Ioffe-Regel limit

Can strong and anisotropic electron-phonon coupling explain SnSe's low lattice thermal conductivity? The reduction of lattice thermal conductivity due to strong electron-phonon interactions at zone-center have been studied theoretically in silicon by Liao *et al.*[@Liao2015] It was found that at high carrier concentrations ($>$ 10^19^ \si{\per\cubic\centi\meter}), the overall lattice thermal conductivity was reduced by as much as 45\%. Moreover, the scattering rate of phonons was dominated by electron-phonon interactions for low-energy phonon modes, and not (anharmonic) phonon-phonon interactions. Something similar was calculated in silicon germanium by Fan *et al.*[@Fan2018] These ideas were tested experimentally in crystalline silicon membranes by Zhou *et al.*[@Zhou2020] using transient thermal grating diffraction which showed that at room temperature, the thermal transport was indeed strongly affected by electron-phonon interactions when carrier concentration was increased via ultrafast photoexcitation above 10^19^ \si{\per\cubic\centi\meter}.

The behavior of the thermal conductivity $\kappa$ with increasing temperature in SnSe exhibits an asymptotic behavior above \SI{600}{\kelvin} (@fig:snse-performance) which is reminiscent of the Mott-Ioffe-Regel limit on the resistivity in so-called *bad metals* [@Ioffe1960;@Mott1974;@Gurvitch1981]. The Mott-Ioffe-Regel limit expresses that the transport properties of quasiparticles saturate once their mean-free-path has fallen below the lattice dimensions[@Zhang2019]. Our measurements suggest that the phonon mean-free-path in SnSe might be close to the Mott-Ioffe-Regel limit above \SI{600}{\kelvin} due to strong electron-phonon coupling. This happens at equilibrium due to the thermal enhancement of the electron-phonon scattering rate (@eq:snse-ep-scattering-rate), and ultrafast electron diffuse scattering reveals a similar behavior via impulsive photodoping. 

### Incompatibility of results with simple relaxation mechanisms

The experimental results show a relaxation of the intensity near zone-center after the initial fast rise described in the previous section, which is correlated to the rise of diffuse intensity across the Brillouin zone (\SI{4}{\pico\second}). The energy stored in the small-wavevector strongly-coupled modes can relax in many ways. The two simplest potential explanations are anharmonic decay of phonons, and phonon-mediated valley scattering of charge-carriers. However, it is expected that those two energy relaxation pathways imprint the structure of the phononic and/or electronic dispersions, which is not observed in the ultrafast electron scattering measurements.

#### Anharmonic decay of phonons

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-relaxation-amplitude file="figures/snse/relaxation-bz.py" caption="Relative diffuse intensity change at \SI{5}{\pico\second} shows no structure representative of anharmonic decay of small-wavevector modes."}
```

The anharmonic decay relaxation mechanism sees one small-wavevector phonon generate two lower energy phonons in a process that conserves energy and momentum. There are several reports on the strong bonding anharmonicity in SnSe[@Zhao2014;@Li2015;@Zhao2016a;@Hong2019;@Lanigan2020]. However, the phonon lifetimes are estimated to be longer (\SIrange{15}{30}{\pico\second})[@Chandrasekhar1977;@Li2015;@Lanigan2020] than what has been observed via ultrafast electron scattering (\SI{4}{\pico\second}). The results presented here are *not compatible* with an anharmonic decay picture for a different reason: the lack of structure in the diffuse intensity dynamics. The measurements in graphite (@sec:graphite) have shown that the anharmonic decay of phonons measured in the time-domain is highly representative of the phonon dispersion due to energy- and momentum-conservation rules. However, the diffuse rise in intensity away from zone-center is completely uniform. This is shown in @fig:snse-relaxation-amplitude, where the average relative diffuse intensity increase at \SI{5}{\pico\second} shows no structure beyond the partitioning of the Brillouin zone described in @sec:snse-regions. Most importantly, the diffuse rise everywhere is found to happen with the same characteristic time-scale (@fig:snse-highsym).

#### Phonon-mediated valley-scattering

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-valley-scattering file="figures/snse/valley-scattering-diagram.py" caption="Diagram showing the in-plane carrier relaxation process as phonon-mediated valley scattering, which does not match the experimental results (see text). Color intensity represents the photoelectron and photohole densities $N_{e^{-}}$ and $N_{h^{+}}$ respectively, where white is zero. The contours represent the dispersion of @fig:snse-electronic-structure. **a)** Carrier densities just after photoexcitation. **b)** Carrier densities after $\sim\SI{1}{\pico\second}$ showing that carriers have undergone intravalley scattering mediated by small wavevector phonons (arrows) to the local extrema of the conduction and valence bands. **c)** Carrier densities after $\sim\SI{5}{\pico\second}$ showing that carriers have undergone intervalley scattering mediated by large wavevector phonons (arrows) to the global extrema of the electronic dispersion."}
```

Another potential relaxation mechanism is phonon-mediated intra- and inter-valley charge-carrier scattering[@Sjakste2018]. Electrons undergo vertical transitions when absorbing \SI{1.55}{\electronvolt} photons, creating holes. Given that the direct, optical band gap of SnSe is less than the photon energy at \SI{1.3}{\electronvolt}[@Shi2018], the electrons/holes have some excess energy above the local conduction/valence band extremum. The charge-carriers can relax in two (possibly simultaneous) steps [@Sjakste2018]. The first step is the relaxation of charge-carriers to the local band extremum by interacting with small-wavevector phonons. The second step is the relaxation of charge-carriers to the global band extremum by interacting with small and large-wavevector phonons. This process is shown schematically in @fig:snse-valley-scattering. 

Intra- and inter-valley scattering are expected to imprint the structure of the electronic dispersion onto the created phonons. To understand why, the allowed intervalley relaxation pathways were simulated for electrons and holes; the following explanation focuses on electrons for simplicity. Consider $E(\vect{k})$ to be the in-plane electronic dispersion in reciprocal space. An initial electron density-of-states $g^i_{e^{-}}(\epsilon)$ around local band minima is assumed as shown in @fig:snse-valley-scattering b). Electrons with energy $\epsilon$ can only relax to locations in reciprocal space where the dispersion is lower in energy. This constraint can be expressed using the Heaviside step function $\Theta$, where $\Theta\left\{-g^i_{e^{-}}(\epsilon)\right\}$ is unity for $0 < g^i_{e^{-}}(\epsilon)$ and zero otherwise. The number of allowed relaxation pathways $P_{e^{-}}(\vect{k})$ in reciprocal space are therefore given by the cross-correlation between the initial electron density $g^i_{e^{-}}(\epsilon) E(\vect{k})$ and the allowed relaxation pathways $\Theta\left\{-g^i_{e^{-}}(\epsilon)\right\} E(\vect{k})$: 
$$
    P_{e^{-}}(\vect{k}) \propto \int_{0}^{\infty} d\epsilon \left[ g^i_{e^{-}}(\epsilon) E(\vect{k}) \right] \star \left[ \Theta\left\{-g^i_{e^{-}}(\epsilon)\right\} E(\vect{k}) \right]
$$
where $\star$ is the cross-correlation operation with symmetric boundary conditions, which accounts for Umklapp scattering processes[@Peierls1929]. The proportionality constant is chosen so that $P_{e^{-}}(\vect{k}) \leq 1$. Similarly, holes scatter up in energy so that:
$$
    P_{h^{+}}(\vect{k}) \propto \int_{0}^{\infty} d\epsilon \left[ g^i_{h^{+}}(\epsilon) E(\vect{k}) \right] \star \left[ \Theta\left\{g^i_{h^{+}}(\epsilon)\right\} E(\vect{k}) \right]
$$
where $g^i_{h^{+}}(\epsilon)$ is the initial holes density-of-states as shown in @fig:snse-valley-scattering b). The results of these calculations are shown in @fig:snse-intervalley-sim. While these calculations are sensitive to the initial density-of-states, note that there are still many regions in reciprocal space where relaxation is forbidden regardless of the initial conditions (i.e. $P_{e^{-}}(\vect{k})$ and $P_{h^{+}}(\vect{k})$ are zero). The structures shown are *not compatible* -- even qualitatively -- with the measurements shown in @fig:snse-relaxation-amplitude, which is azimuthally-symmetric.

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-intervalley-sim file="figures/snse/valley-scattering-simulation.py" caption="Relative number of allowed relaxation pathways after initial intravalley scattering of charge-carriers. Regions in white represent relaxation pathways that are forbidden, no matter the initial distribution of hot charge carriers. **a)** Relative number of relaxation pathways for electrons. **b)** Relative number of relaxation pathways for holes."}
```

### Polaron formation

As described in the previous section, the relaxation of photogenerated carriers or the anharmonic decay of phonons is expected to imprint the structure of the electronic or phonon dispersion on the diffuse intensity, respectively, due to energy- and momentum-conservation [@Stern2018;@RenedeCotret2019;@Otto2021]. However, measured changes in the diffuse intensity are broad and radially-symmetric in reciprocal space. This is indicative of lattice distortions that are local in real-space. Given that SnSe is a polar lattice, and that strong electron-phonon coupling to polar phonon modes has been calculated[@Caruso2019], our results can be understood as the formation of polarons. 

Polarons are quasiparticles that combine a free charge carrier with the effect the charge carrier has on the polarizable lattice, creating a local lattice distortion[@Landau1933;@Frohlich1950;@Feynman1955;@Holstein1959]. The free charge is said to be *dressed* by polar phonons as the charge and lattice distortion propagate together. The configuration coordinate picture of this process is shown in @fig:snse-carrier-dressing, where delocalized electrons are dressed by phonons which lowers the total free energy of the system. Polarons play a large role in many material properties, including charge transport and multiferroism; interested readers are encouraged to read Franchini *et al.* [@Franchini2021]

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-carrier-dressing file="figures/snse/carrier-dressing.py" caption="Configuration coordinate diagram of the process of polaron formation as the dressing of charge carriers. **a)** Schematic band structure diagram following photoexcitation, depicting nonthermal delocalized conduction electrons (equivalent picture for holes not shown). **b)** Schematic band structure diagram after carrier localization indicating a polaron peak below the Fermi energy $E_F$. **c)** Configuration coordinate showing the free energy of the system as non-thermal delocalized carriers self-localize via phonon-dfressing, which generate local lattice distortions known as polarons."}
```

A polaron, like any point-defect-like deformation of the lattice, involves many phonon modes, as local lattice distortions in real-space cannot be described with a finite number of lattice normal modes. Calculations by Sio *et al.*[@Sio2019] have demonstrated that in other polar lattices, electron and hole polarons have widely different characteristic lengths. Electron polarons tend to be larger and hence are composed of low-wavevector modes, while hole polarons tend to be smaller due to the relative flatness of the valence band and thus involve phonons modes across a wider range of wavevectors. This difference in size impacts the precise combination of lattice waves which make up a polaron, and is expected to be visible in ultrafast electron scattering measurements. 

#### Point-defect model

In this section, the effect of a polaronic lattice distortion on the scattering intensity will be calculated. Recall the scattered wavefunction (@eq:scattering-diffracted-intensity-zero-temp):
$$
    \braket{\vect{x}|\Psi}_0 \equiv F(\vect{q}) \propto \sum_i f_{e,i}(\vect{q}) ~ e^{-i \vect{q} \cdot \vect{r}_i}
$$
where $F(\vect{q})$ is the static structure factor, and $\set{f_{e,i}}$ and $\set{\vect{r}_i}$ are the atomic form factors and positions, respectively. The subscript $0$ indicates that no polarons are present. A polaron induces a lattice distortion just like a point defect[@Guzelturk2021] based on the electrostatic interaction, which is expressed as the displacement field $\vect{u}(\vect{r})$. This displacement field will be given an explicit expression further below. For simplicity, assume that the polaron is located at the origin of the coordinate system. The effect of the polaron is given by the substitution $\vect{r}_i \to \vect{r}_i + \vect{u}(\vect{r}_i)$[@Fultz2013defect]:
\begin{align}
    \braket{\vect{x} | \Psi} 
        &= \sum_i f_{e,i}(\vect{q}) ~ e^{-i \vect{q} \cdot \left[ \vect{r}_i + \vect{u}(\vect{r}_i) \right]} \nonumber \\
        &= \sum_i f_{e,i}(\vect{q}) ~ e^{-i \vect{q} \cdot \vect{r}_i} ~ e^{-i \vect{q} \cdot \vect{u}(\vect{r}_i)}
\end{align}
Note that $e^{-i \vect{q} \cdot \vect{r}_i}$ is directly proportional to $e^{-i \vect{k} \cdot \vect{r}_i}$ by definition of the reciprocal vectors. For small displacement fields, $e^{-i \vect{q} \cdot \vect{u}(\vect{r}_i)}$ can truncated to first order in $|\vect{u}|$:
$$
    \braket{\vect{x} | \Psi} \approx \sum_i f_{e,i}(\vect{q}) ~ e^{-i \vect{k} \cdot \vect{r}_i} ~ \left[ 1 - i \vect{H} \cdot \vect{u}(\vect{r}_i)\right]
    \label{eq:snse-polaron-amplitude}
$$

The displacement field can be modelled using the following phenomenological deformation:
$$
    \vect{u}(\vect{r}) = A e^{-\frac{|\vect{r}|^2}{r_p^2}} \hat{\vect{r}}
    \label{eq:snse-polaron-strain-field}
$$
where $A$ is an arbitrary constant and $r_p$ is a characteristic dimension of the polaron, with an associated full-width at half-maximum of $2 \sqrt{2 \ln{2}} ~ r_p$. As will be made clear shortly, the direction vector $\hat{\vect{r}}$ is arbitrary, and $\vect{u}(\vect{r})$ is not assumed to be spherically-symmetric. Substituting this displacement field in @eq:snse-polaron-amplitude:
$$
    \braket{\vect{x} | \Psi} \approx \sum_i f_{e,i}(\vect{q}) ~ e^{-i \vect{k} \cdot \vect{r}_i} ~ \left[ 1 - i \vect{H} \cdot \hat{\vect{r}} A e^{-\frac{|\vect{r}_i|^2}{r_p^2}} \right]
    \label{eq:snse-polaron-amplitude-gauss}
$$
The evaluation of this expression is most easily done using continuous integration, rather than summation. Let $\vect{r}_i \to \vect{r}$, $\sum_i \to \int d\vect{r}$, and $f_{e,i} \to f_{e}$ be the appropriate average atomic form factor for all atomic species. @eq:snse-polaron-amplitude-gauss becomes:
\begin{align}
    \braket{\vect{x} | \Psi} 
        &\approx f_e(\vect{q}) \int d\vect{r} ~ e^{-i \vect{k} \cdot \vect{r}} ~ \left[ 1 - i \vect{H} \cdot \hat{\vect{r}} A e^{-\frac{|\vect{r}|^2}{r_p^2}} \right] \nonumber \\
        &\approx 4 \pi f_e(\vect{q}) \left[ \delta(\vect{k}) - i \vect{H} \cdot \hat{\vect{r}} A \sqrt{\pi} r_p e^{-\frac{|\vect{k}|^2 r_p^2}{4}} \right]
\end{align}
The scattering intensity is proportional to $\left| \braket{\vect{x} | \Psi} \right|^2$:
\begin{align}
    I(\vect{q}) 
        &= \left| \braket{\vect{x} | \Psi} \right|^2 \nonumber \\
        &= \left| 4 \pi f_e(\vect{q}) \right|^2 \left| \delta(\vect{k}) - i \vect{H} \cdot \hat{\vect{r}} A \sqrt{\pi} r_p e^{-\frac{|\vect{k}|^2 r_p^2}{4}} \right|^2 \nonumber \\
        &= \left| 4 \pi f_e(\vect{q}) \right|^2 \left[ \delta(\vect{k}) - i \vect{H} \cdot \hat{\vect{r}} A \sqrt{\pi} r_p e^{-\frac{|\vect{k}|^2 r_p^2}{4}} \right] \left[ \delta(\vect{k}) + i \vect{H} \cdot \hat{\vect{r}} A \sqrt{\pi} r_p e^{-\frac{|\vect{k}|^2 r_p^2}{4}} \right] \nonumber \\
        &= \left| 4 \pi f_e(\vect{q}) \right|^2 \left[ \delta(\vect{k})^2 + A^2 \pi (\vect{H} \cdot \hat{\vect{r}})^2 r_p^2 e^{-\frac{|\vect{k}|^2 r_p^2}{2}} \right] \nonumber \\
        &= I_0(\vect{q}) + \left| 4 \pi f_e(\vect{q}) \right|^2 \pi r_p^2 e^{-\frac{|\vect{k}|^2 r_p^2}{2}} (\vect{H} \cdot \hat{\vect{r}})^2
\end{align}
where $I_0$ is the scattering intensity without lattice distortion. It follows that the fractional change in scattering intensity is given by:
\begin{align}
    \frac{I(\vect{q}) - I_0(\vect{q})}{I_0(\vect{q})}
        &\equiv \Delta I/I_0 \nonumber \\
        &\propto \frac{r_p^2 e^{-\frac{|\vect{k}|^2 r_p^2}{2}}}{I_0} ~ \hat{\vect{H}} \cdot \hat{\vect{r}}
\end{align}
where $\hat{\vect{H}}$ is used to denote the unit vector along the $\vect{H}$ reflection. Assuming that the scattering intensity without polaronic lattice distortion ($I_0 \sim \delta^2(\vect{k})$) falls off like $\sfrac{1}{\vect{k}}$[@Guzelturk2021]:
$$
    \Delta I/I_0 \propto |\vect{k}| r_p^2 e^{-\frac{|\vect{k}|^2 r_p^2}{2}} ~ \hat{\vect{H}} \cdot \hat{\vect{r}}
    \label{eq:snse-polaron-intensity-change}
$$
Importantly, whether $\vect{u}(\vect{r})$ is three-dimensional or uniaxial only changes at which reflections are relative intensity changes visible ($\hat{\vect{H}} \cdot \hat{\vect{r}}$). @fig:snse-polaron-size-model shows the contribution of a polaron to the total scattering intensity profile. Other radially-symmetric displacement fields have been modelled in Guzelturk *et al.*[@Guzelturk2021], which only changes the definition of the polaron characteristic length $r_p$.

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-polaron-size-model file="figures/snse/polaron-size-model.py" caption="Simulation of scattering intensity due to polarons as a function of polaron size. **a)** Radial intensity profile due to a polaron with a Gaussian displacement field (@eq:snse-polaron-strain-field). The color scaling applies to all subfigures. **b)** Scattering intensity across the Brillouin zone due to a large polaron (full-width at half-maximum of %{electron-polaron-size} ). **c)** Scattering intensity across the Brillouin zone due to a small polaron (full-width at half-maximum of %{hole-polaron-size} )."}
```

#### Dynamic polaron formation

The change in the diffuse intensity profile at two characteristic timescales -- \SI{1}{\pico\second} and \SI{5}{\pico\second} -- can be fit using the modelling of @eq:snse-polaron-intensity-change. Only reflections which are nearly parallel to $\vect{c}^{\star}$ were used in the following analysis. 

For the fast time-scale, the radial diffuse intensity change is much easier to extract using a biexponential fitting over time, much like what is shown in @fig:snse-size-comparison. This is because directly extracting the diffuse intensity profile at \SI{1}{\pico\second} includes the nearby Bragg peak contribution. The diffuse intensity change was integrated in a ring of radius $|\vect{k}|$, and fit with a biexponential. The diffuse intensity change at \SI{1}{\pico\second} -- the maximum of the curve -- is proportional to the amplitude of the fast exponential, and so the exponential amplitude is used as a proxy value. The error in the amplitude is taken to be the uncertainty in the fitting parameter. The fast time-scale is only visible on reflections which are parallel to $\vect{c}^\star$ (informing on atomic motion aong the $\vect{c}$-axis), and so it is fit with a one-dimensional polaronic strain field of the form $A e^{-|\vect{r}|^2/r_p^2} \hat{\vect{c}}$


For the slow time-scale, the Bragg peak dynamics are mostly flat, and so the radial diffuse intensity profile can be extracted directly. This is effectively the azimuthal average of @fig:snse-relaxation-amplitude. The error in the diffuse intensity change at \SI{5}{\pico\second} is taken to be the standard error in the diffuse intensity at equivalent radii. In this case, the slow diffuse intensity increase is found at all reflections, and so this data is fit to a three-dimensional, spherically-symmetric polaronic strain field of the form $A e^{-|\vect{r}|^2/r_p^2} \hat{\vect{r}}$. It is important to recall that the experiments presented herein are insensitive to the atomic motion along the stacking axis $\vect{a}$, and so the fits are compatible with a polaronic strain field which is cylindrically-symmetric about the $\vect{a}$-axis.

TODO: merge with figure before and show line cuts
```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-polaron-fits file="figures/snse/polaron-fits.py" caption="Change in the radial scattering intensity profile for two time-delays after photoexcitation, for reflections nearly parallel to the $\vect{c}^{\star}$ axis. The colored areas represents the standard error in the intensity change. Solid curves are best fits to @eq:snse-polaron-intensity-change. The radial profile of the intensity change at \SI{1}{\pico\second} is consistent with a one-dimensional polaron with a full-width at half-maximum of %{electron-polaron-size} along the $\vect{c}$-axis. The radial profile of the intensity change at \SI{5}{\pico\second} is consistent with a three-dimensional polaron with a full-width at half-maximum of %{hole-polaron-size} in the $\vect{b}$-- $\vect{c}$ plane."}
```

The radial profile changes were fit with the modelling of @eq:snse-polaron-intensity-change using a nonlinear least-squares routine. The change in radial intensity profile at \SI{1}{\pico\second} is consistent with a polaron with a full-width at half-maximum of %{electron-polaron-size} along the $\vect{c}$-axis, while the change in radial intensity profile at \SI{5}{\pico\second} is consistent with a much smaller polaron with a FWHM of %{hole-polaron-size} in the $\vect{b}$--$\vect{c}$ plane. The fits are shown in @fig:snse-polaron-fits. In analogy with the work by Sio *et al.* [@Sio2019], the large, fast-forming polaron is assigned to be an electron polaron, while the small and slow-forming polaron is assigned to be a hole polaron. It must be emphasized that this assignment is tentative. However, with this assignment in mind, a visualization of the polaronic strain in real-space is shown in @fig:snse-polaron-realspace, where the displacement of atoms is calculated based on Born effective charges from Caruso *et al.* [@Caruso2019]

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-polaron-realspace file="figures/snse/polaron-realspace.py" caption="Real-space visualization of the atomic displacement due to the large and small polarons. The unperturbed dimensions of the unit cell are marked by solid black lines. In both subpanels, the background color is used to show the full-width at half-maximum of the displacement associated with the polaron. **a)** Large one-dimensional electron polaron along the $\vect{c}$-axis. **b)** Small symmetrical hole polaron in the $\vect{b}$ -- $\vect{c}$ plane."}
```

### Polarons and thermoelectric properties

The density of polarons overlapping at a distance equal to their full-width at half-maximum is \SI{3.2e19}{\per\cubic\centi\meter} for the larger (electron) polarons and \SI{3.2e21}{\per\cubic\centi\meter} for the smaller (hole) polarons. These densities can be compared to the carrier densities generated by the pump pulses. The photocarrier density $N_{\gamma}$ is given by $E(f) / V / \SI{1.55}{\electronvolt}$, where $V$ is the sample volume, and $E(f)$ is total energy deposited in the sample for a particular fluence $f$:
$$
	E(f) = (1-R) \eta f \left( 1 - e^{-\frac{t}{\delta}}\right)
$$
Here $R=0.54$ is the reflectivity at \SI{1.55}{\electronvolt}[@Makinistian2009], $\eta=0.27$ is the internal quantum efficiency[^qe], $t$ is the sample thickness, and $\delta=\SI{100}{\nano\meter}$ is the penetration depth at \SI{1.55}{\electronvolt}[@Makinistian2009;@Barrios2014]. The relationship between fluence and $N_{\gamma}$ is shown in @fig:snse-photodoping for a \SI{50 x 50 x 0.045}{\micro\meter} sample.

```{.matplotlib #fig:snse-photodoping file="figures/snse/photodoping.py" caption="Photocarrier density generated in SnSe for \SI{800}{\nano\meter} pump fluences on a \SI{50 x 50 x 0.045}{\micro\meter} sample. The lower and upper limits are shown as grey dashed lines, based on the uncertainty of \SI{\pm 5}{\nano\meter} in the thickness of the sample."}
```

The similarity between photocarrier densities and maximal polaron densities imply that if most photocarriers are dressed by phonons, SnSe finds itself in a *polaron liquid* state in which polarons are overlapping, even at the lowest fluence investigated. This polaron density is also in line with the optimal carrier doping in SnSe required for the operation of efficient thermoelectric devices[@Sootsman2009;@Zhao2016a;@Fan2018].

The polaronic nature of the charge-carriers likely explains the phonon-glass, electron-crsytal nature of SnSe[@Rowe1995]. The dressed charges are better isolated from scattering mechanisms because of higher screening. The scattering of undressed charges might otherwise limit the carrier mobility at high temperatures and carrier doping.

## Conclusion

In this chapter, combined ultrafast electron diffraction and diffuse scattering measurements on photodoped SnSe were presented. The measurements showed strong electron-phonon coupling to small-wavevector phonon modes polarized along the lattice distortion of the low-temperature $Pnma$ phase, and uniformly-weaker electron-phonon coupling everywhere else. Bimodal polaron formation was found to be the simplest self-consistent explanation of the data. These results reveal that strong, anisotropic electron-phonon coupling and emerging polaron formation may play a large role in SnSe's ultralow thermal conductivity and carrier mobility. These findings bring insights into the physics behind one of the best bulk thermoelectric materials, and may pave the way for the design of better thermoelectric devices in the future.

### Outlook

There are multiple natural extensions of the research presented in this chapter. Do the phonon dynamics change near \SI{600}{\kelvin}, where the conduction band minimum changes? Can photoexcitation drive the material into a metastable $Cmcm$-like phase with impulsive photodoping? Performing similar ultrafast electron diffuse scattering experiments at higher temperatures would answer these questions. Another important avenue to explore is study high-quality, fully-dense crystals. The crystals used here are the exact same used in Zhao *et al.*[@Zhao2014], which have been criticized for not being fully-dense[@Wei2016] (\SI{5.43}{\gram\per\cubic\centi\meter} vs. \SI{6.13}{\gram\per\cubic\centi\meter}). This discrepancy in densities brings a drop in DC electrical conductivity by a factor of 10[@Zhao2014;@Wei2019]. Using high-quality, low-defect samples will enable the simultaneous application of ultrafast electron diffuse scattering and time-resolved terahertz spectroscopy to fully-characterize the determinants of thermoelectricity following impulsive photodoping.

Monolayer SnSe has been suggested as a possible platform for ultrathin ferroelectrics[@Fei2016]. The measurements presented herein are not sensitive to the dynamics along the $\vect{a}$-axis (interlayer direction), but it is possible that interlayer coupling contributes to the results presented in this chapter. More experiments with a view of dynamics along the stacking axis are needed to determine the potential ferroelectric nature of polarons in SnSe as has been investigated in lead halide perovskites[@Frost2017;@Joshi2019;@Wang2020b].

[^cuong]: The orbital make-up of the electronic bands is known thanks to work by Cuong *et al.*[@Cuong2015], but note that their lattice parameters swap the $\vect{b}$ and $\vect{c}$ axes compared to work by all other papers referenced in this chapter.
[^zt-fully-dense]: Work by Wei *et al.*[@Wei2019] has shown that in fully-dense SnSe single crystals, the maximum value for $ZT$ is reduced to $<1$ at \SI{800}{\kelvin}.
[^qe]: The quantum efficiency was determined by B. Dringoli and D. Cooke via time-resolved Terahertz spectroscopy, which is unpublished at this time[@Dringoli2021].

\FloatBarrier
## References {.unnumbered}
\printbibliography[heading=none]
